Good to see you all here.
Thank you very much for, uh, coming along today.
Appreciate that. Thank you. Some things organized here.
Thank you. Cheers.
Well, thank you very much for, uh, for me today.
Um, and we're looking forward to a conversation.
Really appreciate it.
Um, so, um, as per usual, we'll just ask for some, uh,
some opening comments to begin with, uh,
before we, uh, get into a, to a q
and a, a conversation with you.
So, Kia,
Kia,
just saying that we're new to our positions.
Um,
so,
um, any chance of going to the next slide?
Um, uh,
we've invested in a lot, many, many, um, hours, um,
of diverse content.
Uh, and this has been the case for the 30 plus years that
has been in, in existence
and supporting, um, industry, developing, um, talent
directors, producers within the industry, uh,
and ensuring that Al Maori is everywhere
and recently heard, uh, in Australia,
that they say every win.
Hmm. So everywhere, every win, uh, every day
to all to all.
And I think that's the key point here is that, um, we are
spreading the love Maori.
Uh, so in terms of content, very diverse from
Kaka, uh, to dramas news, uh, online, various
platforms to ensure that we patch everybody, engage
with everybody, young, old, uh,
and those, um, in especially,
uh, who are our fluent speakers.
And the importance of intergenerational transmission
is seen within all our programs.
Next slide.
Music has also been a huge, um, source
of Te Maori, uh,
and we support have supported a hundred over a hundred, um,
way this year, this financial year, including,
which many of you probably would know of Marlon Williams,
uh, a very talented
and a person on his journey, their journey.
And we have traveled on his journey
through documentaries online, uh,
and he was celebrated the recent Silver Scrolls
and his album number one on the Chances.
Um, but one of many, one of many, uh, Wata Maori, uh, that
our AU have enjoyed.
And we continue and will continue to support, uh,
the recording of wta, uh,
and ensure that there are many elements in which, um,
Rio Maori is transferred and shared.
And WTA is one of them. Next slide, please.
And, and also, uh, one of the areas that, uh,
we do have a huge focus on is radio.
They are our connection to the regions.
Um, so we support radio, iwi radio throughout,
uh, Maui, uh, through various broadcast live,
um, news broadcast,
and you may have seen recently Kaka
and also Han, um, in which we have engaged
with across the board.
Next what, and as I mentioned
before, Lon Williams mm-hmm.
Uh, and Stan Walker,
but one of, uh, two of the many, um, artists we support, um,
both on their real journey, both, uh, enthusiastic
and, um, those who are leaders in
re Maori music
and ensure that Ranga Tahi see that if they also want
to get into music, that re Maori is one avenue,
um, where you can have success.
Uh, and I think with, with Marlon Williams,
especially just in the past year, um,
also following his journey, we do understand,
and learners of all levels understand the challenges
of learning Maori,
but also, uh, the benefits
to whanau, not just individuals,
but to whanau when it comes to learning
and being able to converse with
and in general, converse with anyone
who is willing and able.
So,
and as, as you would've heard last, um, year,
um, great discussion around the corporate model.
Um, and it's, it is a, uh, a model where we can,
um, where we do look at the, um, attitudes
and behaviors when engaging with Maori programming,
Maori platforms, online programming across the board.
And we see zero re in which there is
almost no use, but receptive towards Maori.
And then try, um, doing our best to write shift speakers
and write shift in general, um,
and overseas, um, to become passive
and hopefully towards the end, become active speakers
actively passing on transmission to their, uh,
and within their wau.
So ultimately hoping to write shift audiences, viewers,
those who engage with any of the programs
that we fund and support.
Um, but I'm sure we we'll talk about that, um,
as we go into any other questions.
And if you have further questions, definitely
we can dive into the corporate model.
Um, so pathway forward, uh, Henry, ah,
uh, always elevating
and supporting storytellers, always supporting
and elevating the story.
So we, uh, as UA Kiwis
al Maori are engaging with Te Maori everywhere in anywhere,
even supermarkets, you know, you hear,
and a lot of Wata Maori are played in supermarkets.
So we, we take it for granted that
actually re Maori is everywhere
and you can engage with it at any time.
That is the everywhere and everywhere.
Um, and ensuring that we continue to support
Maori, uh, within every, uh, sector,
every, uh, province, every city.
So that Maori especially, um,
understand the, how unique Tero Maori is, how unique Maori
and its culture is, and also
that our cultural identity depends on the revitalization
and the support of te Maori.
Uh, and the engagement
with it is also important when it comes to, uh,
public spaces and areas in which we frequent, uh,
everywhere is important for Maori to be spoken.
So we're not just talking about radio,
we're not just talking about tv
and we're not just talking about in general, um,
in spaces like these where you may hear a few words, uh,
or, um, but hoping that, um,
once audiences engage
that we are sharing this actively
with Wau all the time, every time.
And ensuring that, that our attitudes
and behaviors towards Al Maori change to the point
where we become, uh, actively sharing
and actively, um, engaging every time with te Maori
and ensuring that we do as
value Maori.
Sure.
We'll head straight into questions Yes. For, for you.
Good. Like to start.
Thank you. Um, and thank you
for those excellent opening remarks and,
and setting some context for us.
Um, I, in a previous life was a, um, television producer
and was on occasion lucky enough to produce content
with your funding for, um, for KA Maori.
So, uh, for the opportunity to do that.
Um, you've, you've stated in your report
that you're committed to working with the sector
to co-design a future fit model to encourage stability
and achieve the best outcomes for Al Maori.
What does co-design look like?
Is part of my question,
because when we look at mainstream, TVNZ has cut funding
for Kar stuff in three news are similar,
and Taal Maori generally seems
to be taking a backward step under this government.
Are you concerned that Taal Maori is being
undermined and undervalued?
There's always the concern
that it has been undermined, undervalued.
Um, recently,
or actually over the past few years, we've
had a mahi relationship with NZ
and New Zealand Film Commission,
and I think that's shaped changing in a lot of ways,
our attitudes towards, um, Maori language content
on all platforms.
Uh, and that is also in many ways changing
how we think about te Maori content on mainstream platforms.
And in terms of chain changing attitudes, um, I would hope
that those programs that we do co-fund with, let's say,
and New Zealand Film Commission, um, also, um,
support the movement towards right shifting and audience
and right shifting attitudes
and behaviors generally across the board.
Not only, um, those who are producing the, the content
and those who are engaging with the content content,
but also those who are funding the content.
And those like yourselves who are,
are advocating for, um, the continued support
of te Maori in all areas in, on all platforms,
and especially with, uh, entities like Tamai Pahu.
So absolutely, there are challenges, um,
but we'd like to always think of the positive
and how we can progress to move forward
and moving forward is mahi collaboration.
Any additions to that,
Greg?
Yeah.
Um, uh, you speak in your report about the, uh,
the, the, and, and what you see is the, is either the, the,
the, the pending drop in income
or the likely drop in income?
Can you just speak more to that?
So we, um, um, we have, uh,
uh, time limited funding of $16 million.
So we have to work out how we are going to, um, adjust.
You know, I, we haven't given up total hope that, that, um,
we will be able to retain that, uh, time limited funding,
but we need to be thinking about what we're going to do, um,
if in fact it does drop off.
And, uh, and so, you know, um, I think my grandmother used
to always, or grandfather used to say to me, oh, um,
necessity is the mother of invention.
And, um, when you get faced with crises or,
or challenges like that, then you have
to sometimes think about smart ways to, to deal with them.
And that's, that's what, uh, we'll we'll have to do.
And, um, I think that, you know, over the last 12 months,
we've done a little bit of that in the way
that we have been working with the sector to, uh,
change our approach to news and current affairs and,
and, um, put in place a more collaborative model, um,
and try
and reduce the, the amount
of duplication within Maori news and current affairs.
So, you know, there'll be a, a range of
things that we'll have to do.
And, um, obviously we'll have to think about, uh, the most
drastic, um, uh, potential, uh,
but also, um, be light footed enough to, um,
change if, if we don't lose it all.
Where are you at with those good discussions around the,
the, um, pending end of that panel?
Well, I, I think that, um, we've got,
we've developing some scenarios which, um, our board will,
I expect, consider
and make decisions on early in the,
in the new calendar year.
Um, obviously we've had a range of discussions,
we've had some engagement with the sector,
but until we, we get a clearer idea of exactly,
we don't want to put too much energy into going down one
course and then have to change. So
That's what I was meaning more about.
When when are you anticipating that you'll have
Clarity? Well, you know, we
have to publish a new SOI
and a new SPE, um, early in the new year.
And, uh, our, we obviously can't publish either
of those until after the budget.
Um, but we will be, you know,
ready on budget day, hopefully to, um,
press the button on print.
25% is a challenge though, losing 25% of our funding.
And it means that it does have a huge impact on the sector,
um, in the sector
and in areas like development, which is, um, 5 million
of our, um, funding goes into developing
our producers, our talent.
Um, so that's a lot to, to lose.
And then across the content that we, that we fund. So 25%.
Yes.
Yeah. And when you're looking at the whole sector, um,
our colleagues at Akata Maori have some time
limited funding as well.
And I think that, um, the, the, the sum of the,
the two amounts of time limited funding is
around $27 million.
You take $27 million out of the Maori media sector
that is going to, that's gonna be a challenge.
Okay. We'll just move to Hua.
Um, I just want to acknowledge, as you've already referred
to him, we, we are really acutely aware
of the funding shortfalls
that really undermine us continuing to battle
and, you know, look for the opportunities to continue
to promote Maori and our content.
And so thinking about,
'cause you've shared that you're gonna be coming out with,
um, with more in the new year,
but, you know, with this, with this clear shortage,
how, how are you responding, you know, in trying
to provide still support to, uh, the various parts
of the network, um, while still trying to innovate?
And I think it follows a little bit on from Ruben's, um,
around, you know, the, the co-design opportunity, the,
um, and then also, you know, the, the due diligence
around the spaces too.
Well, we are too from here in this current environment,
but also we, you need support from us
to get more pya basically in the p So it, it's kind of
that type of question around how do you cope at this stage
and also innovate, um, for now and into the future.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Um, you know, I I, we've,
we've got some ideas.
We've, we've been through one round of scenarios.
Um, some of those scenarios, um, um,
get a toxic reaction.
Uh, but what we hope to do,
and we took a huge step forward, uh, in
that regard yesterday with a very constructive, uh,
conversation with, um, uh, iwi Radio
and, uh, uh, uh, uh, the,
you know, the, the umbrella body for, uh, uh,
our iwi radio stations.
And, and I think that, you know, we can't come up with all
of the answers by ourselves, uh,
because we won't get it right all the time,
but also we need to actually get buy-in.
And the only way we can do it is to, to work closely with
all of the participants in the sector to, to do it.
I, I can't give you specific answers right now,
but, um, we understand the gravity of the, of, of,
or the potential gravity of the situation.
We also understand that we need to, uh, collaborate
with our colleagues to come up with,
create creative answers.
Uh, just to add to that,
I think it's definitely moving forward is gonna be very
difficult with 25% less, uh, in our budget.
And just touching on, um, again, iwi radio
and the open conversations that we've had with,
and the open conversations we do have to have with producers
and the sector moving forward.
Um, although they do know that there is a cut coming,
I think the impact of it, um, is, is something that we have
to, as Larry said, work together.
'cause it is a lot of hard decisions that we have to make.
But if we make those, um, together in, in some sense
that possibly, um, we can find more solutions
and more ways of using the money that we do have,
obviously we'd rather not have the cut and not lose 25%.
Um, so we are leaning on you all, uh, to help us with that.
Um, but moving forward, um, with any cut, whether it's 25%,
even 10% difficult, very difficult.
Just to stop on that, Mr. Chair. Sure.
Um, and, and mindful of that,
'cause I think of Maori radio,
I don't even know whether they've ever
had a funding increase.
Like, you know, they've sat on the same dollar.
Like it's, it's, they, they live on a, the smell
of an oily rag constantly.
And, um, and they're dynamic, whatever they do,
they're in survival mode constantly.
But, and I'm not saying it's a centralization either,
because the, the uniqueness that comes through, you know,
you dare to try
and tell the radio Toko to be managed out of, you know,
here down or something.
You know, you're getting allergic reaction.
Um, you have to maintain that, man.
So in the, in the current environment that we're at,
and really for Maori radio, I think, you know,
they're in status quo,
but still there's a push a that we need
to tighten the belt and work together.
To stretch the dollar a bit further, is the collabor,
is the door for collaboration open, um,
whether it's Maori radio
or other parts of the sector to mahi
how you, how you're being received?
Yeah, I think that, um, uh,
iwi Radio are taking a really, uh, responsible
and, um, wealth considered, um, approach.
And I, we, we've experimented with, um,
regional hubs, and I think that, uh, of the,
of the innovations we've had over the last two
or three years, the, the regional hubs have been
probably the most successful.
Um, and not in their current form
where they provide the answers necessarily,
but they do provide, uh, the, the, the example
of what is possible.
And I think we yesterday, uh, saw recognition amongst,
um, the, the members of Akka Dudu Ho about the, you know,
the potential for, um, perhaps adopting different models.
Maori, I mean, if I just picked you a, a small picture
of COVID for radio stations is, you know, they had some
of their Kai Mahi going out to fix antennas
with a soldiering on on,
and, you know, that that's just what they have to do.
And a lot of these antennas are on Mona Dub,
so they're on horseback to go to those, you know, those, um,
wherever they need to be to sold little pieces together
so they can broadcast.
And that is Iwi radio.
Um, it's a lot of whanau coming together, um, broadcasting,
getting news out, um, also, um,
important emergency information to their, um,
radio, uh, in a very, um, uh, uh,
an area many, many valleys where, um, they need a lot
of various types of forms of, um, transmission antennas
to even get a signal out.
So you are right, um, supporting Iwi radio is important
and what that looks like in the future is definitely gonna
be a collaborative, um, working towards,
um, that,
Yeah. Ray could have,
um, opened the door there a little bit.
I wasn't going to talk about this,
but, um, uh, you know, when you, they,
she mentioned the most of those antenna,
that transmission capacity is on Mona Tapu.
Um, and, uh, then, uh,
another Crown entity charges them to,
to actually have their transmission capacity on the
tap proven.
Um, thank you. Coming back to the,
and we've talked a lot about the challenges
that the cuts already and the, and and more to come.
And I guess you, you alluded
to it when you talked about people on horseback,
not Moga tap, it's about people, right?
Both producing the content and,
and, um, receiving the content.
So what does that look like as far as job losses so far?
And what does 25% look like if a 25% card?
Yes. Well, there is 25% of producers, uh,
talent or within those programs, uh, iwi radio, a lot
of rural, rural, um,
but rurally based, uh, without a job.
That is the reality of it.
And also, on top of that, when you don't have those people,
you don't have the talent, you don't have the innovators,
then you lose the creative programs that we currently have,
uh, innovative programs that we currently have on Rio, um,
akata Maori on tataki, and all on our radio stations
and on all platforms.
So losing the talent
and losing those producers, uh, who are Maori, uh,
fluent speakers, it's a huge loss.
It's a huge loss. And like Larry said, we do need
to work together with the sector to ensure that that loss,
um, is not, um, catastrophic.
Yeah. Catastrophic. Exactly. That's probably the best word.
Um, and, and how we do that, we definitely have, has
to be a, um, a all of us in the same room, um,
coming up with solutions.
And are you seeing on top of losing people
who are already in that sector
and in that industry, that young people,
but not just young people, won't want to move into this?
Like, it's too risky to move into that area to follow
that pathway through school or study?
Absolutely. Absolutely.
Um, you know, just speaking from personal experience,
I started in radio when I was 16
and then went into, um, TV around the same time.
So people like me back in those days
and now will be absolutely turned off by the possibility
of only being in the job for maybe two months, three months,
and not really looking at it as a career.
And I think in terms of, um, the, uh, the
landscape that we currently are seeing with tv,
broadcasting, film, um, there was a drive,
uh, three years ago to become
that influencer on all of these platforms.
And with the support
of the Malay Powell helping them towards their dreams now,
um, that challenge is possibly too, too big
for a young person to even think of this as a viable job,
um, or a viable career.
Um, so moving forward, uh, you'll have, uh,
these students coming out of, uh, KO Maori
who are fluent speakers, um, won't be going into jobs like,
um, being in a presenter or producer director,
or even just talent on, on these programs that we fund.
And then we won't have the money
to develop those skills anyway,
because of the 25% loss in funding. Okay. Move to agree.
Yeah. Um, um, so ak, um, you have,
you have laid out a very compelling case as
to why the funding should stay where it is.
So,
um, can I just, um, turn now if it's okay
to a different question.
So just looking at the, um, the three, uh,
main performance measures.
Um, so the, uh,
the second one you guys did obviously really well in terms
of the number of programs or projects funded
for diverse content among,
I paol funded 80 projects against
the target of more than 70.
Um, but there was obviously some challenges
with the other two performance measures.
So the first one, just speak to the, with the target
that 60% of content funded, um, was
to be fluent category content.
So with a minimum of 70%, but it was only 45% was, was met.
Um, can you speak to challenges that you've had around that?
I remember last time, last year, Larry, you
and I were, um, comes you had a, um, some of the,
the example that you gave was of a, um,
of a massive content, uh, that's right.
That had happened at the,
at the Olympics in the previous year.
Um, is that, is it, is the, is the focus still in that area,
even though the performance measure was saying
that you wanna move towards Phil C?
No, I, I, um, I'm not gonna say we dropped the ball.
I think that to some extent, um, you know, we are vulnerable
to what comes in the door
and this year, um, we're well ahead of the target, um,
because what we are actually, um, we,
we, in the first general round of funding,
we didn't spend the money
because we couldn't, um, get what we wanted in terms
of, um, fluent content.
So, uh, I, I think that, yeah, we,
we are vulnerable to what comes in the door, uh,
because if people just wanna make
and platforms want to, um, commission, um, uh,
receptive content, uh, we
just have to push back
and say, sorry, we are not going to fund it
because we are not gonna meet our target anymore. So,
So you are not getting enough pitches for, for Holly
Grill? Yeah, and,
or it, it, it could be that the pictures we got
for fluent content aren't, um,
of a high enough quality as well.
So we have to, you know,
main maintain a watch on both things.
But, um, as I say, uh, with, um,
a more proactive management of it, uh,
this year we are in a much better case, uh, space.
I think also, um, this also goes back to, um, having money
to develop the industry and talent
and producers within the industry and losing that money
because it's possibly one of the areas
that we've all cut straight away, which is the 5 million.
Yeah. So can I just, yeah, sorry, go on. Yeah,
Yeah. No, you'll, you'll
lose the quality of programming
or proposals that you get in also
'cause those that the development funding Sure.
Right. Isn't the shape
or form of various things like workshops or,
or targeting certain producers
and supporting them through, um, uh,
a course over in New York, possibly, you know, with talented
producers and directors.
So exposing them to the world is
also an important element of it.
A hundred percent. Which again, strengthens very
compelling cases to why we should make sure
that the funding stays at its current level.
Absolutely. But just interrogating the, the, the funding
that is at the current level.
Mm-hmm. And you were saying that
before is obviously you've, we've got a number of, um, uh,
students coming out now of, of, uh, kura.
Um, is it, are there, are there challenges
that you've seen about them coming into Maori,
into Maori broadcasting in a way that allows them
to be producing content that's fully in that role?
I, I think that that probably goes back to, um,
the institutions that are there, there to develop, um,
those students who are keen on going into broadcasting.
Um, there aren't necessarily any courses that you can take
that cater towards Maori language, um, speakers.
Okay. Um, but also, um, it's on the industry too, um, to,
uh, create workshops
and, uh, funnel talent into, um,
the right workshops to develop them
to become the directors
and the producers that they know they can be. Yeah.
Got, okay. We move to Johana.
Yeah, I wanted to stop on that.
In terms of workforce
and workforce develop, Greg asked a really, you know,
there's no way to keep journalism program anymore much
to Larry, you know, as there, there's
that we aren't getting, and I think that's a question
for our minister of tertiary education,
because there's a gap there as we look to grow, um,
relevant training programs that can cater to
the growth in real Maori production.
Um, whether it's industry based training or
otherwise, that's a good, that's a good part generally, um,
because if we can
Maori, um,
but, you know, tertiary needs to maybe catch up, you know,
our politics and stuff like that, um, in terms
of their program development.
But they're in a stretch time too, so I don't, I don't,
you know, we'll leave that.
But, um, with, with the current funding constraints
and thinking about both the succession
and bringing in the workforce, we also have that loss
of institutional knowledge.
Um, and reflecting on, you know, the some 27, so
that Maori lost in the long standing
that have been in the industry for a long time.
So, um, with, with that potential continued loss,
um, how are you reflecting that back to, I say to Punty?
'cause they're like, you know, they're the Crown agency
who's meant to be monitoring the situation,
uh, relationships.
Um, do they get it?
Are, are they understanding
what you're telling them in terms of these constraints?
And, um, and then how are we working together to feed
that up, um, to the minister
and to cabinet to help advocate in advance
for the protection and upholding Y 11
and, um, all it was intended to be in terms
of our Maori claim?
And ma
There's a whole lot in there.
Um, the, the first thing I'll comment on is, uh, um,
training and, and industry development.
Um, so one of the areas that we will, uh,
you know, we can bank 25% off the 25%, uh, 4 million,
uh, dollars is probably for us to reduce our,
our industry support for, um,
what we spend on industry support.
And, um, and when we are, are thinking about that,
what we have been saying is actually we need to work
with the sector to get alongside of the tertiary education,
uh, sector to actually, um, uh, so instead
of spending the money we need to, um, work with the,
the two, um, groups to, to fill the space that,
that we are going to vacate.
Uh, so, so that's one thing.
I think the other thing that I, um,
I think we shouldn't lose sight of the fact that, um,
you know, uh, a a lot of our young people,
they're actually not going to want to go into these, uh, uh,
big entities and, and be content makers.
'cause actually they can do it better
by themselves on their phone and,
and not get told what to do by anybody, you know,
reordered around by anybody.
So, um, and I saw an example of that at the weekend
with my son on, uh, who's not a kid anymore,
but, um, on his phone, uh, filming a tangi
and cutting it while we were on the, coming back from, uh,
uh, just on his phone.
So I, um, I think that, uh, what we need
to do is balance the traditional path with, um,
actually the innovative path for, uh, those
that are probably likely to be the most talented, uh,
content creators at the end of the day. So,
So, so with that,
and was that, was your son's content, um, in te Maori?
Uh, no. Well, yes, it could have been. Okay.
It could have been. But, but, and it had a Al Maori
way, right?
Well, had two because they had to stop after 90 seconds.
'cause that's where you can get the license for, uh,
Of Course. And I think there's
accessible accessibility to resources
and instruments where you can produce
programs is a lot easier.
Yeah. But it still comes back to how we develop this talent
and how we, um, support that talent
to make quality programs that we know will, um,
engage audiences to te Maori.
Sure. And that's the 25% that we're losing.
Well, no, but no, I just think, I just,
with all due respect, I just think this obsession
with the fact that you might be losing the money is
distracting from what,
what the conversation I think we can have.
Yeah. Which is that over the last year,
the full funding's been in place,
but you've only met 45% of that target against,
against that target of 60%.
And what you said, Larry, before, was that part
of the challenge is you're not getting enough pitches from,
um, um, content. So
Combination of pitches and quality. Quality.
So is it possible to, for, for, for there
to be at least some kind of pivot within your commissioning
and your acceptance material to accommodate this kind
of resource that you were talking about from yourself?
A absolutely, and to some extent we're already doing it.
You know, um, uh, you know, you look at what Alder did,
uh, um, you know, at the Olympics.
Yes. It's an example for others out there to, to follow.
Um, you know, the, the, the, it's a common, you know,
there's a complication whichever way you turn,
because at the moment, um, you know,
we have been used to getting con uh, uh,
proposals once they're ticked off by, uh, a platform.
Yeah. And more
and more what we are, are gonna be seeing is
that content creators will be coming to, to us, um,
without a content, uh, without a platform, uh,
or significant platform attached.
Now, we, we run the risk of saying, yes,
that's great content, great, uh,
you've demonstrated you can do it,
but if they, what we wanna do is make sure the content gets
out there, and if they don't have, um, uh, a following
of their own that is strong enough
or, you know, so it's, it's a different space
for us to be working in.
We, uh, um, uh, are not just funding something
that's been pre-approved by somebody else.
And then we also need to work out how we manage, um, the,
uh, the, the, the, the creative process, how we,
or have a good oversight on it,
because that's something in the, in the old world,
we leave to the platforms to, to manage
that. So. Right. And
Just, Sorry, and,
and just, um, taking from, um, where Larry left off, I,
I think it's also important too.
Yes. Um, we didn't quite meet our centers there,
but we are ahead of the numbers right now, and,
and we have learned from, um, the,
what Larry was explaining, um, the quality of the pictures
or, um, not having a platform in order to broadcast from.
Um, but those changes have been made to a degree where, um,
the percentages are,
and we will meet our target next year. Awesome.
Do you have a start up on this one?
I, um, well, you got a new one.
I just gotta sub from Dan, Dan, otherwise, so we go down.
Thank you. Um, thank you.
Look, I, um, firstly wanna congratulate you on your, uh,
Maori radio awards and, uh,
and the, uh, wonderful, uh, um, uh, I guess result
for my friends at, uh, M Radio.
Hey, go the East Coast electorate. Um, so well done.
Uh, but my question is, um, going back to the,
the comeback issue
and, um, I, I understand, you know, time limited funding
and it was always, um, spoken of as one limited funding.
Um, and I want to know, um, whether there was anything you
as a board did or could do still, um,
because there's no guarantee, is there,
it's either gonna be anything
but time limited to, I guess, shore up the, you know,
the future for what you were doing in the event
that you'd lost the money, the 25%?
Yes. You,
Um, well, uh,
what I'll say in our defense is that, um,
this is the first time in all of the time
that I've been at Tam Paho
that we have ever experienced, uh,
fund time limited funding, not eventually being baselined.
So that, that, that that's, you know, now I, um, you know,
we've been conscious of the fact that,
that we are going to have to do something.
Uh, we, I think, you know, we'll be 100% ready with,
um, a good answer if we, uh, are called on to deliver, um,
in, uh, you know, six months time.
But, uh, yeah, it's, this is an unusual event.
Um, and,
but despite the fact
that it's unusual event, we'll, we'll be ready.
I think we are taking it seriously as a board.
Um, although we have only been a part of two board meetings,
two board meetings thus far, um, you're
Doing great.
Um, the, the information and the discussions
and, um, the work that the tari have,
have done over the past, um, two years, um,
we've seen the results of that
and we've, um, seen solutions, possible solutions, options,
uh, and in the last two meetings that we are a part of, um,
a lot of debate around what should we do, how can we do it,
um, what needs to be cut.
Um, but I think at the end of both those meetings,
we understood that as a board
collaboration is the way forward.
Okay. Uh, and that is collaboration with
Iwi Radio, as you mentioned.
Um, they're all important to us.
And, um, the, it's important to continue
to support the voices in our provinces.
Um, but then you'll go to, you know, shifting to, um,
the development of, um, talent
and then the number of programs,
and especially the, that we, we fund, they're all important,
but collaboration is the way forward.
And talking to all of the, um,
important groups within the sector, uh, I think that's, um,
the one positive that's come out of, um, the challenge
of losing 25, possibility of losing 25%. Okay.
Yeah. We've made outta time,
but we have one more question from order, not
Question. I'm gonna make this count.
Um,
I'm gonna go right to an area, um, that, uh,
no doubt has put a lot of, um, concern amongst the sec,
um, using current affairs
and the decision around, um, centralizing
or creating the new national hub.
I'll cut straight to the question, which is,
can you please just explain to us
what the processes was were to determine, um, the outcome
of, not so much who the seven regional news providers are,
but just how we arrived at that point
and determining that this is Well,
Um, well, uh, we started off, uh, with, um,
uh, a consultation process.
I think that, um, the most satisfying, uh,
element of the whole process for me was the way that
the sector embraced it.
And we, we facilitated
or established a working group.
And when you have a look at the recommendations
of the working group that they
provided us, um, there's only one that, um,
that we didn't actually, uh, adopt.
And so, you know, I think that, that the, the industry had,
um, a significant part in developing the framework.
And then what we run was contestable, uh,
RFP processes around the elements that, that, that, um,
we'd, uh, put, we tested the RFPs with the working group,
um, and, um, other key players like AKA Maori
and, um, uh,
um, and then we, we run the process.
Um, we didn't get what we wanted.
Um, so we revised, um, RFPs
and run a, a second, um, RFP process.
And again, we revised those RFPs
and consultation with the working group.
And I think that, you know, um, in all the time I've
been in the sector, um, it's, it was the most, um,
I think satisfying collaboration with the sector.
Um, there wasn't the funding agency running off
and saying, here's the big idea, let's do that.
So, and you know, I I, the, the way that we are gonna follow
through with it is, um, over the, the first year,
there are only one year contracts.
Um, and,
but we're hoping that we'll iron out all of the wrinkles in
that first year, and then we'll be able
to consider the possibility of longer term contracts.
Supplementary on that note, only one year contracts was,
which perpetuates, I suppose the, uh, the uncertainty
of jobs, you know, retaining jobs, which is already, uh,
a real problem within the sector itself.
So why that decision just one year?
Because what we want to do is, is preserve the option
for making other changes at the end of
that first year in consultation with the sector.
So, um, I think that, you know, uh, if we were
to enter into three year contracts, um, without
actually having everybody having an opportunity to
iron out any wrinkles that might exist
and, uh, would be irresponsible,
Hey, uh, um, I think that the changes that we've made to,
um, using current affairs funding in this framework,
um, is change.
Um, it is, um, looking towards what
that change looks like after a year, um,
but possibly a better change in terms of collaboration
and better utilization of the provinces
and the news stories that we understand
that our audience wants to hear.
And, um, and told by the people who know,
know those stories the best
and actually have connections to those provinces.
Um, but we understand also on top of, you know, making
that huge change to some, I think it's a good change, um,
when, when we look at the, um, the current framework
and where it could possibly move to that collaboration is,
um, what will come from this more than anything,
but understand, um, that a year contract is,
And I'd just add that it,
it will help us hasen the move to digital.
Digital. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Um, you know, uh, that's, that's a big part of it.
One last step I mention with really the real quality
with, uh, the removal of shows, uh, legacy programs such as,
but centralizing,
but what assurances do you have with this new model
that the quality and the standard,
but that copper model also is you,
you're meeting the targets of the K model with this new
national hub e service?
Um, I, I, I, I think that, uh, uh,
yeah, the corporate, the, the corporate targets is, um,
you know, a high level eco, uh, whole
of ecosystem measure, really.
It's not, I mean, our, our primary impact, i,
i, I believe is in, um, uh, status of the deal
and status is represented in, um, attitudes and behaviors
and attitudes
and behaviors are the biggest impediment
to language revitalization.
So I think that, you know, corporate, um, is high level and,
and we, we don't get down in the nitty gritty
of corporate when we are looking at, um, what we're funding,
uh, so much, um, in terms of, uh,
the, the, the, the new ecosystem.
I, I just really think that,
Uh, You, you, you said it del
and we consider ourselves a Maori language agency
before we are a media, Maori media agency.
And so, um, when we are considering what changes we making
or what funding decisions we're making, we are going
to be always looking at, um, what is going to have the best
or the, the best impact for today, Maori,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna, no, I'm sorry.
I'm gonna frustrate some of my members
because we're actually way over time as it is.
And we've got Jamie and Shane at the be
etching to get up here and talk.
Um, but we, we will take the opportunity potentially
to give you some written questions of, of
what the members still have in their minds.
We've gone outta time, I've down you to greatly
and, uh, well done for two, two meetings.
Thank you. You're doing great.
And we're gonna jump straight into, uh, Maori
change over sorted out here.
Jamie. Well, welcome to you both.
Thanks a lot for, for coming along today.
Um, looking forward to the discussion.
Jamie, you, you know that the
drill here, you've done a plenty times.
So you give us a little bit of a brief opening
and we can get into q and a.
Uh,
go to the next slide.
We Have shown ourselves
what we can achieve when we lead.
It's easy.
I think it's something our people have always wanted.
It's just in our DNA, it needs to be talked about.
Live our values, speak out, ill,
we are here, we are strong.
You have to be confident, you have to be decisive.
Feel like I am exactly where I should be.
That's
Awe inspiring. That's what
it's all about.
All of us kind of coming together as one.
Wow,
I made it.
The future is bright. Evolution of the revolution.
Get back in your office tomorrow and close that valley down.
Next slide.
Um, next slide. Uh,
um, um,
next slide.
Next slide. Uh,
Be proud to be Maori.
Call Moody Kauri. We
Walk backwards into the future,
Trying to give the next generation a better
tomorrow skills.
And our Uniqueness
Is great. The
top players pretty much Maori.
Big time, big time. The
Dedication to Toi Maori,
It's looking like a real demonstration of Ana.
Just wake up. Si. I'm in order to, I'm ready.
I'm not, I'm not ready.
This is not new to us.
No, up north. If you want come
indigenizing ourselves was always the goal
In every breeze And wave
Part.
Killed. I think I straight, she's, oh, see your hand up.
Um, just thanking you for, um, presentation
and, um, really setting the scene nicely for our, um,
corridor that we're going to have.
And I do wanna talk about pya, um,
because you are, you are financially constrained,
you can't ignore it.
And, um, the way with which AKA Maori is having to flex,
change and adapt to what's in front of you.
It would be really good to hear from you,
like those challenges genuinely.
'cause it's, and we need to hear loud
and clear, you know, how is it impacting you?
Uh, but uh, also, you know,
how can you still invest in the personnel and your,
and the platforms and what you need to do
to still be effective in achieving the goals
and the strategies of
System, some technical problems
System. Well, just
as well, we can speak.
So just coming back to your question,
even though we were so enjoying
This guy, so good.
I know it was good. Yeah.
Um, Social value
and how we arrive, you derived numbers, how you,
So, so, so there is a, um, uh, a methodology, um,
that is used and applied worldwide.
Uh, and unfortunately there was no organization here based
in Alua that could help us with this.
So we had to turn to an organization based in Australia who,
uh, one, uh, world recognized
and renowned for this type of work.
And so we worked with them
for about six months on this project.
And so they were able to work with our team,
with our research team,
and using their experience in working
with other indigenous broadcasters
to develop the methodology in which resulted in the dollar
figures that have been produced.
Um, we released the research publicly in,
uh, June this year.
And, uh, the methodology is, is all, um,
detailed in, in, in that research. Yeah.
Supplementary agreement.
Um, Kiara, so how much did this report cost
to, to commission?
We'll need to come back to you with the exact figures,
but, um, it, it, it, it wasn't, um,
it was quite reasonable in our, in our view. Mm.
Like hundreds of thousands or years? No,
Not at all. No, no.
Oh, tens of thousands. Yes. Yes.
But, but, but we'll have to come back
to you with that specific figure. Thank you.
Two years now, translator,
come back from smoker. We're back
On again.
Is it on, uh, Ruben? Sorry.
Oh, you won't need it for me.
Not, not yet.
I'll keep trying. Um, in your annual, your report,
you've said KA Maori is proven,
it delivers unmatched cultural, social, and economic.
Yeah. We continue to be resourced at levels disproportionate
to our proven impact.
I'm not gonna disagree with that statement, um,
in English or Maori.
Uh, but how many jobs have been lost at, at,
for the past 12 months?
So, uh, oh.
Uh,
And are you, are you considering, given the cuts
to funding, are you considering other revenue streams?
And if so, what are they?
Indigenous network.
Uh,
So how much of that million, if any,
comes from the social media platforms that are really happy
to take your content and spread it around,
but not necessarily happy to pay you for it.
Can you give us a sense of the numbers of people
who watch content on those platforms
and also what the breakdown is between here
and internationally,
or the, or the measurements you see from those platforms?
So from the likes of Meta or TikTok, or,
Uh,
Thank you.
Did you have a question? Sorry. Oh, sorry.
Where you go? Um, I'm hearing about this $10 million,
but from my understanding, this was funding
that was time limited on a fiscal cliff, um, made
by the former, um, minister, the Honor Willie Jackson.
Is that, is that what you understand it to be as well?
Oh, um, sorry, I have to,
So, so I think it's an important point.
So I will say it in English, uh,
because I think it's an, it's important context
to be mindful of.
So, uh, during the, uh, previous, uh, administration,
uh, we were, uh, reviewed for Maori,
the Maori language entities, as well as the wider, uh,
Maori broadcasting and media sectors.
And, uh, under the previous minister, uh,
there was a firm commitment made
that once the second review was completed,
the issues around funding the longstanding issues
of funding and the inequity would be addressed.
And so the, uh, it was firmly our belief
and understanding that yes, it was time bound funding,
but actually once the, once the, uh,
review had been completed, that the issues
of funding would be addressed.
And unfortunately, they have not been
addressed to this time.
So thank you. Um,
but so that's, so the,
the bottom line is it was time limited Absolutely.
Notwithstanding those other, um, that you, you,
you said it was time limited.
Can I, can I ask answer to that question?
Is, um, is it true that the baseline funding
has remained consistent since your inception
2008?
Aye. And this funding that we're talking about,
the time was added on top with the date put on it
with the prerequisite
or the precondition of, of the report
that you talked to. Correct.
I'm trying to get, and, and it was based on the notion
that it would be irresponsible for the government to add
to the baseline until the review had been completed.
Ah,
Yeah. We'll just go this up and
we come back forward.
So, Um, we're talking about stable baseline funding,
and, um, one of the key matters
that you address in your report is the shift
to a digital first strategy, which means that there needs
to be a weighing up of what's invested in building digital
platforms for people to access content.
Mm-hmm. Bearing in mind that you're competing against some
of the largest and most
powerful companies do have ever existed.
Mm-hmm. And then creating the content to feed those.
So baseline funding
or even an additional $10 million on top
of baseline funding, you're still asking someone
to do more with less.
Do you think that's for your assessment?
We, as in government, is asking for Kata Maori
to do more with less? Yes.
Yeah. I think you could argue you've done
that every year with inflation.
So yeah, I, but if I can,
and I just wanna make it clear, you know, ever since I moved
to New Zealand, I watch Maori television very often,
you know, and I'm, I don't, you know,
I've told I see some Lebanese Australian and whatever,
and I love what you guys produce.
And of course, in an ideal world, I'd love a lot
of our organizations to have more.
Right. So I just wanna put that out there.
But just coming back to this, so it was time limited,
um, on the condition that certain things are met,
but then the boy Jackson, as you understood, um,
said that it will be revisited when those things are met,
but he's no longer the minister.
Mm-hmm. So, so was that, would that have been part
of the condition as well, or did you understand not
withstanding who becomes minister, it's gonna be
most probably positively revisited?
Well, I think the, uh, what is on the record, uh,
now three independent reviews that have been done,
because under the current minister,
we've just finished another review.
Mm-hmm. And in all three reports,
there are clear recommendations
and findings around the inequitable funding,
longstanding issues that need to be addressed.
So I think that's what's on the record for any minister
or any government that is in power.
So there is that, and I think
as we've discussed previously, one
of the challenges we have is that we haven't had the capital
to invest, to transition into digital, digital friendly
as we would like, because we are still structured under a
linear model after 20, it's 21 years now, right?
And so 22, yeah, 22.
So I think that's been one of the big challenges is that,
you know, we need to transition
and evolve as an organization, as we stated earlier, um,
to be relevant to audiences, whether they be through linear,
you know, linear audiences or,
or, um, audiences that are, you know, viewing us on devices.
So I think that's, that's been the big challenge.
The second review, uh, we were looking to develop, uh,
a business case for further budgeted funding to assist with
that transition into, um, building our digital capability,
our digital platform, which we've begun that journey.
And we have a digital platform, which is sort of,
I think is quite amazing given, uh, given the limited sort
of resource and funding we have,
and really comes down to, as we say, every year, um,
here at select committee, you know, due to the passion
and the enthusiasm of about Kai, um, we have been able
to do amazing things.
Um, but I think the, the caution is, is that
that's not going to take us into the future.
And I heard the discussion from Tam Paho as one
of the matters we had is when we did our 10 forecast,
we could see with the funding cliff
and just the cost pressures of inflation
and other matters that, you know, we had to take sort
of steps to ensure that we were a going concern, um,
over the sort of 10 year period.
And that caused us to undertake Wata, the reorganization,
restructure, as I said in, in the bill
to take matters into our own hands
because yes, you know, um, we couldn't,
we couldn't always rely on a minister coming through
to deliver the, the funding requirements for us.
And so, you know, as, as a board
and as a senior leadership team, we had to sort
of take control of our destiny to ensure that we would be
around through another review, through another minister
to look to secure funding.
And that goes back to, I think the value
and the purpose of actually sort of starting to examine
what is the true value of Akata Maori in terms of
what we offer beyond IL and culture,
and how we can sort
of have a more positive social impact on, you know,
whanau households
and also the sort of the nation, the nation as a whole.
And I think, you know, it's the, it's the start.
Um, and I think we'll build from that in terms
of having some baseline information now
and how we can measure, um, measure our, our, our impact.
And it's, and since my, my personal view is, you know,
we're always having to constantly sort of go above
and beyond other organizations
to demonstrate the value, uh, that we provide.
But I think that's what's required, as Shane said,
with the government wanting to measure results.
Well, we've done that. Mm-hmm.
And it's a start for every dollar that is invested,
there's a $2, you know, there's, it's, there's a $2 return.
We'd like to see that increase over time.
Thank you, chair. Yeah,
I've got a supplementary on this.
And then a, um, primary Mr.
Chair, but to sub on that
and thinking about the Crown obligations, um,
to f Maori over time,
and you know, that, um, it's like a Tai type party,
you know, they come in and they go
and you're constantly under review.
Um, and at what point do we seriously invest in Akata Maori,
uh, to change
and adapt, um, have the relevant workforce that's needed
for today and tomorrow, and also the infrastructure.
So it's great that you've got the business case ready to go.
Um, we deeply need to see the investment
and the value add is, is shining through in terms of what
PTA Maori has done
and can do, um, if it's adequately resourced.
And, and the storytelling is so important.
So I wanting to, um, the partai is around, um, the quality
of the relationship that you have with, um,
their monitoring function.
Is it, you know, um, what supports do you get?
I mean, everyone's reviewing everybody all the time.
Um, but, you know, is that a help for you and,
and is there, um, that strength of relationship
that you can tell the value together of FKA Maori?
And I've got a primary term, Mr. Chair,
How you wanna, I, I think that there is always room
for greater, uh, collaboration, uh,
and, and the true sense of the, of the word.
Um, however, uh, we work closely, uh, with,
uh, the other Maori entities, the Maori language entities,
such as, uh, uh, we have a,
a very special relationship to with the, who appoint
to our board, and of course TPK, uh,
are our primary funders.
And, uh, we work closely with their team regularly, uh,
more from a monitoring perspective
than a policy perspective.
But I would say that it's a positive
and constructive relationship.
Ka your primary Ana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so I wanted to unpack with you,
and, and because we have you here understand, uh, share
what the national news hub is gonna look like, uh,
what is the plan?
Uh, what, what, what's it gonna look and feel like?
Are a regions gonna be a feature of it, you know, the hub
and the spoke, uh, what is Maori bringing to the te
Thank you.
Um, so, um, with, um, HOR being the aka, um,
and you've got the, the, the regions feeding in to
that in terms of the viewer
and, um, the way that we, I guess digest, um,
what's coming into, is there an intention to have like a,
a daily Maori news, um, service set up?
Uh, is it, you know, 'cause I, I'm used to the old news,
you know, like that, that was my daily, um,
and I've, and I've missed it.
It, um, and we've had to cut it in.
We've got to cut it in and stuff like that.
And, um, what,
what's it like gonna look like moving forward in terms of,
because I, I'm so excited about the regional element of it,
forgotten and stuff, but then how, how do we
Mm-hmm.
Think Last question, very
Short last question.
Um, we have talked about ministers,
we know they constantly change,
but have you had any suggestion or request
or pressure from the current minister to move
to a privatization model?
No. Okay.
Succinct answer. It was a Very good, okay.
Hang now with that. Hey, just in closing, um,
well obviously thank you for, for coming forward
and bring, bringing your, your, your staff with you in that.
And, um, you know, I always empathize with, uh, any
entity governance management that has to go
through some significant
restructuring, which you've done this year.
It's, uh, it touches human beings
and, uh, it's a, it's a very tough job.
Um, and, but you've had to show the leadership
that you've had and you've had to make those tough calls,
but people's lives have been put at stake.
So I empathize with that situation.
I also want to note the audit report was Very good. Mm-hmm.
Okay. So I, um, and,
and with that, um, one last comment.
It feels a little bit like Groundhog Day type thing.
You know, the, the, the time you were here a year ago was
a very similar conversation.
Uh, we hear that. We hear that.
And, uh, you know, we don't have the,
the ultimate decision makers around this te
but we empathize with what the is
and what the journey is that we're trying to achieve.
So in our job as a select committee is
to deliver great outcomes for Maori,
and this is part of that.
Okay. So.